Ladies and gentlemen, friends of Tennessee, there's good news from Washington today and
also a little of the other variety.
On the bright side, the Tennessee Valley Authority won the right to self-finance some long-needed
new generating facilities.
The victory came after a lengthy legislative battle between friends of TVA and its private
power enemies.
The self-financing bill, as you know, was approved last month by both the House and the Senate.
It then was sent to President Eisenhower for his approval or veto.
Many persons predicted the President would veto the bill, but the President finally agreed
to sign the measure on the assurance of congressional leaders that a clarifying amendment on executive
authority would be passed.
It was a great day for the Valley when the bill was signed into a law, and I might add
a great day for all members of Congress from Tennessee and other states who have worked
so diligently for its passage.
Under the new statute, the TVA board has a media authority to issue up to $750 million worth
of revenue bonds for expansion purposes.
Why is that so important?
Let me take a moment to explain.
The most serious steep with tragic examples of national decline because of soil, forest,
or water misuse.
The Great Tennessee Valley might have become another tragic example, if the TVA had not
been created in 1953.
Prior to the TVA, the Great Rivers of the Valley were languid in one season, but wild and destructive
in another.
In those days, the soils of the Valley were severely depleted.
The average income of our people was only 44% of the national average.
A smattering of industry was just about all we've had.
Prior to the TVA, only 3% of our rural homes were electrified.
Indeed, the Valley of 25 years ago presented a fairly typical picture of an economically
underdeveloped area.
I need not explain to you the benefits of TVA.
Our farms are now electrified up to 97%.
Farm living knives is modern as urban living.
Farm incomes have increased through the use of our TVA electrical service.
Our industrial program in Tennessee has moved briskly ahead because we have ample low-cost
power.
At the same time, the TVA has opened up great recreational areas.
Our state has become a major tourist attraction.
Nevertheless, officials of the TVA for the past several years are warned of a possible
power shortage, as more and more electricity to it was demanded by our whole man for industry.
They pointed out that more generating facilities would be required soon.
Our progress in the Valley would be severely restricted.
Electricity cannot be stockpiled like most products.
That is, you can't stack cans of electricity in a warehouse like bales of cotton or sacks
of sugar.
Electricity has to flow from distribution areas immediately to the farm or the home or
the industry.
But obviously there must be an ample generating capacity or someone somewhere along the electric
line will not get what he wants.
More than that, it takes about three years to build a new generating steam plant.
So TVA asks the Congress for authority to borrow money.
This money, accidentally, will be repaid by the TVA with interest, just the same as if
a businessman goes down the street and borrowed money from his local bank.
In other words, the government is not at one cent.
Neither is the taxpayer.
The funds will be repaid by TVA from revenues collected from the sale of electricity.
Immediately after TVA asked Congress for authority to borrow money, enemies of the TVA tried to
slam the door in its face.
They were successful in delaying the passage of the self-financing bill last year when
it passed the site, but it was pigeonholed in the house.
But finally we made it.
And TVA cannot take steps to expand its power generating facilities for the betterment
of both home, farm and industry.
Well friends on the dim side, I must report that necessary monies for the proposed Melton
Hill and Carthage Dams will have to await the next session of Congress.
These projects are number one on my list of must appropriations in the 1960s session.
As a member of the Senate Appropriations Committee, I was instrumental in pushing through a
$1,250,000 appropriation for preliminary work on these two dams.
This appropriation was backed off, however, when in conference for the House of Representatives.
We did our best.
It's my hope and indeed my conviction that next year we'll mark the start of these
projects.
You may be assured of my continued effort.
Thank you very much until next week.